We're concerned with the production of the final
product and its marketing. This has been a rather
successful strategy because we're working with
the producers and with the large volume
processors who see us as friends and we're not
competing with the grocery products companies
who would otherwise see us as their competitors if
we were developing final products for the
marketplace.
More recently, we have taken a look at our program
and decided that we really were in the extraction
or separation processes business, although we
currently have about $1 million a year research
budget, and most of it is spent on
oilseed processing. We recognize that the
techniques that we use are applicable to
processing of other crops, other non-edible
crops.
Early this spring, we established a new section in
the Food Protein Research and Development
Center. It's called the Separation Processes
Laboratory. The objective there is to
concentrate on the science and engineering of
separation and to also work on other applications
such as industrial crops. Within the last five
years, there's been increasing interest in the
replenishable resources. This means the growing
of crops to replace
fossil energy and hydrocarbon sources. In other
words, growing of our own liquid fuels,
lubricating oils. her own chemical feedstocks
rather than relying on drilled petroleum or
mined coal. We feel that this work will continue,
although there certainly will be a strong
petroleum industry and perhaps even a stronger
coal industry in the future. And thus we have
ventured into the separation processes area and
have done and are doing some work with
agricultural crops that are non-edible. We have
worked with jojoba, J-O-J-O-B-A, which is an arid
lands crop. It produces a oil. Well, it's a
perennial bush that has seeds or nuts,
which when crushed produce an oil that is very
similar to whale oil. Rather than being composed
of triglycerides, it's composed of aliphatic
esters. That means you have straight chain rather
than branch type of fat
in jojoba oil. As such, it is a highly stable
oil and is used in high pressure lubrication
applications such as jet aircraft, automatic
transmissions,
permanent lubricated type of motors, equipment,
things of this nature. We're also currently
working on extraction of latex or rubber from
Guayule, that's spelled G-U-A-Y-U-L-E.
This is another shrub that grows along the
U.S.-Mexico border in the arid lands region from,
say, the Big Bend west
through to California. The
shrub contains a latex which, when extracted, is
very similar to natural
rubber from Havilla. That's H-A-V-E-A. or the
rubber tree that is cultivated in the Dutch East
Indies and in Central Africa. Many people don't
realize that after petroleum, our next largest
import in terms of dollars is rubber in the United
States. And we can no longer, as a nation, rely on
the rubber producing areas staying within the
free world group of countries. Certainly our
experiences in Vietnam have shown this as well as
the various revolutions and coups in Africa. In
case of a
war or even a period of political hardening, the
United States would be in a very vulnerable
position if it lost its supply of rubber and could
no longer import
it. Synthetic rubber is
very important to our economy, but it will not
replace natural rubber.
Fairly large amounts of natural rubber are
required for high performance applications such
as military aircraft, tires, engine mounts, tank
treads, and this
type of application. Also, as the U.S. has gone
from larger to smaller cars and to radial tires,
the average natural rubber content to the tire has
had to increase because of the higher performance
requirements.
Synthetic rubber just will not substitute
completely for natural rubber, and there is need
for developing a better solution to our
national rubber needs.
We are working on developing processes for
extracting this latex from the Wai'uli bush.
Unlike the avia, a rubber tree which grows large
and can be slashed and then the rubber or latex bled
into a container, the Wai'uli bush at say three to
five years, which would be normal harvest time,
would be only two and a half to four feet tall. And
there's no way to slash and bleed them. You really
have got to either polarize them, that means cut
the top branches off, or else dig up the whole
plant, and then it has to be
ground, shredded to release
the latex through one of several processes.
We feel that there's going to be additional
industrial products interest in the country as
time goes by. And this is why we have established a
separation processes laboratory. Getting back
to the oilseeds processing area, in recent years
we have taken the position that our main role is to
improve the profitability of oilseeds
production and processing for the Texas farmer
and processor and the U.S. producer and
processor. As such, we have
broadened our base to include various concerns
such as energy conservation, dust control,
development of usable and really available
solvents, improving extraction efficiency, and
also improving the feed value of the byproducts.
For a while, the emphasis at the center, this was
during the 70s, was on developing low-cost,
developing sources and processes for low-cost
food proteins However, we have found that the U.S.
being an exporter of food products is far from
being on a vegetable protein economy, and even
the developing countries aren't quite ready to
use some of these vegetable proteins that have
been developed. So the emphasis has
intentionally shifted to improve the
productivity and profitability of the local
processing industry. What are some of the methods
that your research program is funded by? You
mentioned that you had a budget of about a million
dollars a year.
We receive about 12% to 15% of our funding through
the engineering experiment station. This is
primarily to be used as seed money, program
development money, holdover money, say, when our
people are working between various projects.
About 40% of our
funding comes through the Natural Fibers and Food
Coordination Commission of Texas. It's a group
that is separately funded by the state
legislature and its objective is to develop
new uses and expand the uses of Texas grown crops as
well as assist in the development of the
processing industry for them.
We then have about 20% of our funding from federal
competitive type of grants and the balance about
25% from industry programs. We have two industry
programs. One is the contract research program
where we do contract research for firms. The other
is a industry services program where we make our
pilot plant available to, our pilot plant
equipment and train operators available to
companies who want to come in and
try various combinations of equipment for
developing new processes. As I see it, the area
that is most likely to grow will be that of the
industry services and the industry research
programs. I expect that the state Originated
funds will probably grow
with
inflation, which really means no actual
increase. And the federal programs will probably
be held rather in tight reign by the current and
subsequent administrations. So really our
future, It depends on our ability to recruit
research work directly from industry. We've been
fairly successful in doing this. What are some of
the industries that have hired your researchers
to do projects for them?
We've had various groups come in. want to try our
extraction equipment, for example, on various
items, including spices, nuts, rather unusual
items.
We have had a program recently from Shell Oil
Company, who would like to develop a market for a
new type of solvent to replace hexane. They're
working in isopropyl alcohol, and they're
working in conjunction with Anderson Clayton
Company, who is probably the single largest
processor of cottonseed in the country. They also
have soybean interests. We have developed
various procedures for utilizing
isopropanol. We also have done contract research
for to improve the recovery of oil.
Our program is of an international type. Well,
let's say a national and international type.
Originally, when the oil varieties of sunflower
were brought back to the United States from
Russia, You have to remember that sunflower is an
American crop first, but it's a short-season
crop. Where does it grow mainly? Well, currently
the cultivated varieties grow mainly in the
tri-state area of North and South Dakota and
Minnesota. Originally it was a wild plant that
grew in the Midwestern states. The plant is a
short-season crop and very attractive to
countries that have short growing seasons. This
is why the Russians picked it up in the late 1800s,
and they put quite a bit of effort into improving
its genetics and productivity. In time, they
developed varieties that were very high in oil
content. What they did was they were able to
decrease the thickness of the hull. Therefore,
the head would have more seed and produce more oil
per acre. When these varieties were brought back
to the US in the early 1960s, the work on their
growing and processing was initially done here at
Texas A&M. Much of the processing work in this
department, not exclusively, We have still
continued to have an interest in sunflower
processing and are probably the most, well, we are
the most active U.S. group, even though the
industry has gone north. Over the years, it's
become apparent that cotton is much more
profitable in Texas than sunflower. However, the
northern states have found that sunflower is more
profitable than their alternative crops, wheat,
and barley and oats.
Recently the U.S. has, recently plants, oil seed
processing plants, sunflower plants have been
built in the northern states, but the engineering
companies in getting the processing
information, particularly the hulling
information on seed hulling, have used our
facilities to check out the applicability of
cotton seed haulers.
We are currently doing some work on cotton seed
processing for an engineering company that
operates out of Paris, France.
Black Nations of Africa, which were under French
control as colonies, later re-invited the French
back to work with them in developing their
businesses. This particular company is very
active in cocoa and coffee.
trading, export, and also processing, and has
asked us to work with him on extraction of various
fractions from these crops. Another area that we
are getting into that I might mention, it's a good
example of how when you look upon your business as
being function rather than commodity oriented,
you immediately recognize other applications.
We currently are applying
reverse osmosis membranes to processing of
stripped beer from alcohol fermentation.
There's been quite an active program here at A&M
developing
gasohol production techniques. Agriculture
engineering has led the program. They have a small
alcohol fermentation plant in the shops next
door. Eventually, they mix the alcohol, about 10%
alcohol, with gas things to produce gasohol.
But when one
ferments sorghum or corn into alcohol, it's
necessary to run this process at rather dilute
concentrations. The beer, which is the fermented
liquid, at the end of the process is run through
distillation columns, and the alcohol is
distilled off. However, the remaining beer, or
spent worth, as you call it,
presents certain problems. First of all, it's too
dilute
for animal feeding. Some of it can be consumed by
animals, but you really would bloat the cows
pretty badly if you expected them to get all the
nutrition from it. And, of course, it presents
disposal problems. If one were to dehydrate it,
for example, or dry it, the energy required would
far exceed that gained by producing alcohol. So we
are using reverse osmosis as a means of recovering
the water and concentrating the soluble so that
they can be used as feed. And there are many other
applications we can point to. As far as the future
is concerned, I think that we'll be working more
broadly with other agricultural crops and also
with extraction processes per se.
The extraction processes including milling,
separation, cleaning, have neglected for a very
long time. And
in many cases, we are limited in our food and
industrial applications by the purity of the
materials we have. We feel that we can make quite a
contribution in
developing more usable ingredients from
agricultural crops. Do you think there's any
certain food that would be the food of the future as
far as protein?
Not one certain food, but I think that we're going
to have to be more efficient, more economic, so to
speak, about using the available calories and
proteins. Really, that's all that. that we have to
work with. As the world's population density
increases, we're going to have to use every
technique possible to raise enough food. This, in
some cases, means expanding
the grazing lands
in some countries because When you have a very
sparse vegetation,
cows, and especially the smaller animals like
sheep and goats, can still harvest some type of
food from the land. They can harvest and
concentrate it, so the man then can, of course, use
the meat.
I think there's going to be a general, trend
towards more use of vegetable food proteins
directly rather than by recycling them through
animals. By no means do I mean that we're going to do
without animals, because when you
process oilseeds or cereals directly into human
food products, you very often have as much as 50%
byproducts. And the only way to get the nutrients
out of these materials is by recycling them
through animals. Animals really are sort of a very
useful biological machine. They will
concentrate the
protein as well as the available calories more
efficiently than some of the machines that that we
know how to build. Of course, when you have a prime
grain or an oil seed, say like a soybean or wheat,
animals are relatively inefficient in that their
conversion rate
is relatively low. It takes about four or five
pounds protein to put a powder protein on an
animal, for example.
But where your only choice is residues from
processing or grazing land, I think animals are
very efficient and they'll stay. We'll probably
be seeing even more ruminants as time goes by, and
probably less of those animals that compete
directly with man, such as swine and poultry. Of
course, it depends upon where you are. Here in the
United States, we will, I'm sure, stay on an animal
protein economy for many years. Other countries,
have enough problems feeding themselves right
now, including getting enough money to import our
crops just to stay alive on a vegetable protein
diet. Do you have any figures on what percent of the
people in this country are not getting enough
protein in their diet? Not just off the top of my
head.
Actually, protein is relatively inexpensive. I
think that where people are not getting enough
protein or calories, it's a matter of education
and appreciation. We are not protein deficient as
a nation. Are some nations protein deficient? The
countries that have high... birth rates and where
say the
where advances are being made in medical science
and people continue to live and continue to live on
for a long time they are squeezed from both ends yes
yes I'd say that you can almost draw draw a band
around the world, around the equator, and you'll
find many of the countries there being protein
deficient.
That is because there just isn't enough protein to
raise, to go around for the people. Actually,
there is more than enough protein in the world.
Many of the problems are those of concentrating it
away from, say, the fiber. And then, of course, we
have the problem of distribution and the
economics that go along with it. In the United
States, for example, we raise enough protein to
feed about 1.5 to 2 billion people. Of course,
we're a relatively small country. I don't know
what we have. 230 million. 230 million, but I think
only 12% or 15% of the world's land mass. Maybe not
even that much. Less than that. Less than that,
maybe 8%. So if we can grow that much protein,
certainly protein is not scarce. The problem is
one of getting the protein to people. As I was
alluding to earlier, When it comes to nutrition,
there are only two basic things that man must rely
on the environment for. One is the calories. He
can't make them because he needs the calories for
his energy. The other is certain amino acids. And
these are, they're limited to amino acids, and
only plants can make some of them. And whether man
eats the plants directly or whether he eats an
animal, eats the plants, we come into a cycle where
only these essential amino acids can be produced
by plants. And the question is how to get it to man,
whether you get it to him directly or or recycle it
and concentrate it, say, through animals. Is
there anything you'd like to say in closing?
No, I think that I'm pretty optimistic as far as
both the center and food science is concerned. I
think the golden years are ahead of us really in
terms of contributions that we'll be able to make
both to the state of Texas and to the to the world.
We're starting this fall a series of practical
short courses in oil mill operations. It's our
first venture into the technical training area.
There seems to be quite a built up demand and many
industry leaders have encouraged us to go into
this field. I think we can serve a very useful
purpose both in Texas and the U.S. and in the world.
Thank you very much for talking with me tonight,
Dr. Lewis.